Hello, and welcome to a new coding adventure. Today I'm going to be simulating a simple
ecosystem, an idea which was inspired by this really cool video from the channel Prima.
I started by generating a little map with water tiles so that creatures would have something
to drink, and land tiles for them to move around on. I also added some trees as decorations
and obstacles, and then some little plants as a food source.
Next I needed a creature, so I made a crude little bunny out of some cubes and placed
him into the world. He seemed happy enough just hopping around, but of course I wasn't
going to let him have such an easy life. I gave him hunger and thirst, so he'll need
to find some water soon or else die. Fortunately for him there's some nearby, so he's hopping
over to that, and having a drink. There's also a plant over there, so he's going to
head over to that, and gobble it up. Now he's thirsty again, so back to the water. This
by the way is his sensory radius, outside of which he's blind, so currently he's just
hopping around randomly trying to find some food, but now that he's spotted that plant
up there, he's going to head directly over to it.
The next thing I added was an urge to reproduce. Currently that urge is stronger than the bunny's
hunger or thirst, so he'll go searching for a mate. He's not likely to have much luck
though on account of being the only rabbit in existence, so I'll add in a female bunny,
and let's see if they get together. They're both searching, and it looks like they've
spotted one another. You may want to have virtual eyes for this. Alright, it's safe
to look again. The bunny is now pregnant, so in just a few moments we should be able
to welcome some new little creatures to the world. These little fellas will take some
time to grow up, during which their speed and sense of sight will develop, so right
now they're of course particularly vulnerable. In the simulation, female bunnies actually
have a gene which controls how long they're pregnant for. If that duration is short, they
can obviously have offspring more frequently, but the offspring will be more underdeveloped
and have less of a chance of surviving to adulthood. There are a few more genes, one
for sensory distance, and one for reproductive urge, which I've described already. Then
there's one for speed, allowing the rabbit to move faster, at the cost of getting hungry
and thirsty more quickly. Finally, for males only, there's desirability, which here is
expressed by having redder fur. So looking at the code for a second, when a male rabbit
spots a female who's also looking for a mate, he'll send a signal to her, and the
more desirable he is, the higher the chance that she'll accept his advances. If she rejects
him, he'll add her to his mental list of unimpressed females, and won't approach
her again until he's forgotten about it a little while later.
Now when two rabbits mate, the offspring will inherit these genes from their parents. In
the code you can see that each gene will be randomly selected to come from either the
mother or the father. On top of that, there's a small chance for each gene to mutate, which
will increase or decrease its value by a little bit.
Alright, I'm going to start the simulation out with 300 rabbits, and let's see what
happens. So the population first shoots up with the first wave of babies, but the majority
of them aren't very good at surviving, so their numbers quickly decline. At this stage
with just around 100 rabbits in existence, they're at a high risk of extinction. Several
times when I ran the simulation, they got unlucky at this point, and just died out. But
this time they seem to be hanging on tenaciously, and with each new generation becoming more
adept at surviving. After about 20 minutes of simulation, the population was over 1400.
About 2,600 rabbits died from hunger along the way, and over 4,000 from thirst. Let's
have a look at what happened to the genes over this time. The average gestation duration
rose quite steadily, indicating that in this environment it was better to have fewer, but
stronger offspring. The sensory distance rose rapidly, as those too short-sighted to reliably
find food and water were weeded out. The reproductive urge initially dropped, but I guess as the
senses of the rabbits improved, it became less risky to spend more time searching for
a mate. Next, there's speed, but apparently moving faster wasn't really worth the cost.
And finally, designability, which fluctuated a bit for some reason, before finally heading
upwards. I then thought it would be interesting to introduce a predator, so I made something
that hopefully looks at least a little bit like a fox, and told it to move towards rabbits
and eat them. These rabbits are basically just sitting ducks though, so I made the fox
have to work a little harder for his meal by making them flee from him. So, going back
to where we were in this simulation, I added in an initial population of 10 foxes and let
it continue running. At first things seemed to be going okay, but the number of foxes grew
rapidly since they were at the top of the food chain, and they hunted the rabbits to
extinction. Then they realised they'd made a terrible mistake, and starved to death.
With the introduction of the foxes, speed of course became much more valuable to a rabbit
survival. The other traits though remained roughly the same. I tried running the simulation
again, this time with the foxes being there from the outset. As the foxes became more
numerous, the rabbits were nearly hunted to extinction, but they managed to make a
huge comeback. Unfortunately, this led to an explosion in the fox population as well.
The rabbits went extinct, and the foxes followed shortly thereafter.
What I found interesting about this run is that in the presence of the foxes, the rabbits
evolved to have an extremely high reproductive urge. I guess if they didn't find a mate
quickly, they might be killed by a fox, and not have the chance to pass their genes on.
The gestation duration stayed low this time, a favouring quantity of offspring over quality.
Here's how the other traits turned out in case you're interested.
I'm rather sad that I couldn't get the rabbits and foxes to coexist for very long. The only
time the foxes didn't hunt the rabbits to extinction was once when they weren't able
to find the last remaining group of bunnies, and starved to death. Those bunnies then lived
happily ever after though, so I guess it's a happy ending.
In any case, I hope you've enjoyed this coding adventure, make sure to have a look at the
others in the series if you did, and until next time, cheers.